The earth is home to over 7 billion people divided into countless cultures and languages.
People are on the move, and in many lands immigrant populations are growing.
These cultural differences are often an obstacle to true communication.
And yet, there exists a group of people united the world over by the pure language of truth.
Together they joyfully feed on published spiritual food, prepared just right and translated into languages that touch their hearts.
How is this work being accomplished?
And how can you have a share in the fulfilment of prophecy that everlasting good news is being declared to those of every nation, tribe and tongue?
Over 6,000 different languages are spoken on earth today.
Even though some may speak of more common language, why is it important to learn the good news in their native tongue?
When you learn another language, it's an intellectual exercise.
But you may not feel the same way emotionally about the words that you're learning as you would with your own language, the language which you were born.
While I was in Tahiti, there in Tahiti people speak Tahitian and French.
And my wife and I were visiting with a family, the wife spoke some English.
So I was asking her, now what language is easier for you? French or Tahitian?
They are the same.
I said, what language do you dream in?
I dream in both.
Then I said, when you're angry with your husband, what language do you use Tahitian?
And that little antidote highlights that language is something close to the heart.
The language that we speak when we're eating, when we're emotionally feeling strong about a certain subject,
that's usually the language is best to initially hear the truth in.
To reach these diverse peoples with the good news, accurate translation of Bible truth is necessary.
But where and how is this translation work done?
It is done by thousands of volunteers around the world in various circumstances.
Many translation teams work at the local branch facilities of Jehovah's Witnesses,
others work at translation offices, ideally near where their particular language is primarily spoken.
For example, in the city of Amzuzu in northern Malawi, a translation team of 16 works at the location of a former missionary home.
The Chitambuka language is their assignment, and this location puts them right in the middle of their territory of approximately 1 million people.
The translation team, along with others assigned for support, start the day together with a spiritual discussion.
It's another time to begin our morning worship program, and therefore, like to ask rather a million young guys to introduce the text.
Typically, they will then begin working in small groups. The first step is thorough preparation.
During preparation, we read the whole text carefully and look up the scriptures,
and if there's a difficult text, we think of how we can solve it.
After that, they begin translating.
One does the initial translation, another checks the translation against the English,
and the third one proof reads the Tumbuka text for clarity and naturalness.
It is demanding work, and it comes with its own set of unique challenges.
It may be that some articles explain things that are unknown to a Malawiian audience.
They are known only in other countries. Sometimes they use illustrations that cannot be understood here, because people have never seen them.
If we just retain some illustrations without thinking about our audience, chances are high our audience would miss the point.
On this challenge, Jehovah's Organization is helping us. We receive ongoing training.
First, to understand English and translate not words, but thoughts,
so that when our brothers receive the publication, they can understand and be encouraged.
For translators in remote areas, there's great satisfaction in seeing the words of truth and print,
and from the appreciation in the field.
We feel good preaching using the publications we have translated,
because during translation time, it's like you are not very sure how people will react after reading the article,
or they understand the point, but when you go out preaching using those books,
you show them the magazines. Their reaction tells you that your translation was clear.
The translation team for the Maya language is located in Merida, on the Yucatan Peninsula in eastern Mexico.
This location puts them in the middle of their language territory of over 900,000 people.
To improve their work, the translators regularly interview local Maya brothers and sisters,
regarding the accuracy and meaning of expressions difficult to translate.
It is a necessary technique, because in those indigenous languages to which we translate,
or in sign languages, there are no works of reference.
There is very little information written. The translators don't have dictionaries in cyclopedias or newspapers,
and they cannot consult the internet about how the ideas are expressed, or how some terms are used.
Then the field test is necessary, so that the translator can have confidence that what he is writing is really how it should be.
We have learned which words are not too common anymore, and which words are known more widely in the territory.
The translated publications are having good results. For example, in 2005, there were 116 Maya congregations in Mexico.
When the Require brochure and Bible stories book were released that year, they added 42 congregations in just eight months.
Increasingly, more effort is being focused on smaller groups of language speakers.
For example, Native Americans living in Canada on the Blood Tribe Reserve are hearing the Kingdom message in the Blackfoot language.
A congregation of about 50 publishers in southern Alberta preaches to a population of over 15,000.
They cover this vast territory working with a limited number of Blackfoot publications.
The translation team works at the home of Bert Talman, brother Talman is a blood tribe member, and along with other native speakers,
they are working to produce more tools for their ministry.
The title of the track is You Can Trust the Creator. This one was written especially for Native people.
When you open the track and you see the pictures on there too, there's a picture of a Native chief on their chief Joseph.
People can identify right away with that, and the beautiful paradise scene, they're all Native people in there.
Sometimes it reminds them of how conditions must have been in the past with the Native people, but we always tell them,
this is the promise that our creators holding out to us for the future, and so that really touches their heart.
There's been a lot of misrepresentation by Christendom and other religions.
Because of this lack of trust that has developed over the years from their experience, from Christendom's religions,
they have a hard time trusting in non-Native religions.
A lot of Native people have been hurt in the past by broken promises, so this track helps them to see that there is a creator who doesn't break his promises.
Everything he's promised has come true, and so the things he's promised for the future, they can trust it.
When we show them that we have something especially for them in the black foot language, and they see it, and to see their eyes light up,
they're so happy like, wow, this is for us.
Well, I remember one girl when I showed her the creator track. She was a young girl, and she took it out of my hand.
She looked at it, and she said, you mean this was made just for Native people? This is made for us.
And I said, yeah, it was made just for you. And she kept looking at and turning the page over, and she was pretty amazed by that.
She kept saying, wow, it was really nice to see that reaction because they feel like they are special.
The creator is really thinking of them, and they're not just being pushed aside or forgotten.
We read about experiences in the yearbook where in other countries, there's great efforts going on to help them,
and we never thought as Native people that we would be a part of that.
And so now to see the attention there on that tube is so heartwarming, and it's very, very encouraging,
and it makes us want to do our very best to try and help as many people as we can.
This is no ordinary literature delivery to the branch office in Kigali, Rwanda.
Translated locally, the contents were printed in the United States. They traveled by boat to South Africa,
then rode a truck over land for eight days to arrive at their final destination.
And today, the governing body is pleased to announce the release of the complete new world translation of Holy Scriptures in the Kingdom of Rwanda language.
How happy I was. I was so full of joy that I wanted to stand up and dance,
but it was not possible to do it in the middle of the talk. I was very happy.
How can I explain it? Yesterday, when this Bible was released, I shed tears of joy.
It's like the expectation made my heart sick, and when I got the thing desired, my heart healed.
So the thing desired is the Bible that we have waited for for years.
Now, because that thing desired has come, my heart is no longer sick.
Now, God's Word can be clearly read in the language of the heart.
What indescribable joy I felt, I looked at the heavens, and I thanked our Heavenly Father.
For me, it is difficult to express the way I am feeling. I am happier than ever.
During the release talk, tears were about to come from my eyes because of the joy of having the Bible in Kingdom of Rwanda.
I am determined to continue to thank Jehovah and to trust his organization because I have evidence that his organization is real and international.
The release of this Bible touched my heart. I was about to cry because of joy.
I do not know how I can express my feelings. It is beyond my expectations.
Translated material, all freely available and supported by voluntary donations, is having a good effect in the field.
As for me, I have appreciated it. It will help me not only in the ministry, but also in personal study.
I am eager to start reading it from cover to cover.
This Bible will help me in my personal study and it will help me in the ministry because I will use it with full confidence.
Knowing that anywhere I read, it has been accurately translated. That made me really happy.
It will be a pleasure to read it because it is easy to understand.
We used to read other versions which used archaic words that were difficult, even though they were in our own language.
But having this Bible well translated, I think that will help us to apply what we learn in order for us to be closer to Jehovah than ever.
Most Rwandis do not know foreign languages and they only speak in Rwanda. When they receive publications in their language, they are interested in the good news increases.
In the recent past, other publication releases in Rwanda have touched our brothers deeply.
At the release of the new songbook, we sang that song about the resurrection and at the end of it, brothers were crying.
Guess why? Because they understood what they were singing. Why don't they cry when they sing in French?
They can understand the words of the songs, but in a foreign language, it is difficult for the message to touch the emotions in our heart.
But your mother tongue speaks to the heart and arouses the emotions.
The availability of the songbook in Kenya Rwanda, it was the happiest moment at Bethel.
The sisters were so happy. They were joining their voices and they sang in loud voices.
Because we were working in offices, we wondered what was happening. But those sisters told us,
you translators, we are very grateful because of your work. It touched my heart very much.
For more than a century, Jehovah's Witnesses have made a priority of translating Bible truth.
At the making of this video, we translate in over 600 languages with more being added regularly.
No group anywhere even attempts such a task.
The Watchtower magazine is produced in over 200 languages and it is the only journal that is published regularly in some 50 of those languages.
In scores of other languages, Jehovah's Witnesses produced the only literature that is readily and freely available to the people.
Typically, the publisher growth in these languages is much higher than the worldwide average.
In recent years, more emphasis has been given toward the effort to translate the Bible.
In 2005, the New World Translation was available in whole or in part in 56 languages.
But in just seven years, by 2012, the number of languages more than doubled to 117.
So what if we meet someone in our ministry who speaks another language?
Nihao, Wajau, perhaps we can learn just a few words or a simple presentation in that language.
And we can always make full use of the tools available.
They first of all need to ascertain, could they use publications such as the Good News booklet and ascertain what language.
And then hope the person by letting them read the message that's been printed there.
In addition to that, we encourage them to go onto the website.
Many of these languages already have files there that can be printed and downloaded.
And perhaps they could be passed immediately onto the person.
It's always interesting to see the look of surprise on someone's face when maybe the next day or even that same day the publisher comes back.
And here they have a printout of something in their own language.
By filling out the please follow up form for foreign language speaking people that you meet,
a visit can be arranged by someone who speaks their language.
These referrals are coordinated by the local branches.
Good morning. Good morning.
I had a really nice call.
Were you standing in for me?
I certainly will. Great.
Taking it a step further, some publishers have embarked on learning a new language by enrolling in classes organized by individual branches.
This group of publishers is learning Chinese in order to speak to a growing local population where they live in New Jersey, USA.
It's helping to give me the confidence to practice more in the field.
Instead of going right to my English and apologizing that I don't know much Chinese, it's forcing me to practice what we're learning in the class in the field and actually use it with Chinese people.
One of the language class principles is to use the course material as soon as possible in the field.
Often times the students will see fast results.
Immediately, the very first door I went to in Chinese, the people were so impressed that we were trying to learn Chinese that they invited us right in.
People come to the meeting just from giving them an invitation. They're so excited.
And they just want to know what the truth is about and it's nice to see that excitement.
Well, they want to know why are you learning Chinese?
Why would you attempt to learn such a difficult language?
And so when we tell them it's because we want to teach the Bible and we want people to know the good things in the Bible, they're very interested.
When you extend yourself out there and then you see the positive response.
Just being able to extend yourself and see the rewards is just wonderful.
For some, knowing a language reasonably well can open up opportunities for expanded service.
A number of publishers have chosen to serve in foreign language fields by moving to those territories in other countries.
Ecuador has long benefited from the preaching work carried on by those willing to serve in areas of greater need.
I presently we have about 600 foreigners from 23 different countries serving here.
We have people from all walks of life and all ages, even some that come down here with small children.
Some are young and use their energy to go out into rough territory, they're walking, they're biking, they're using local transportation.
Others with more years, they're using the maternity to stabilize the congregations and all have been a significant factor in the steady growth here in Ecuador.
We wanted to be somewhere where the ministry was productive, where people really would respond when we spoke to them.
So that was one thing and the other thing is simply the time we wanted to spend more time in the service.
And because of the economy we had to work a lot and so when we changed to a different economy we were able to have more time for the ministry.
Because we were a nice congregation but it was very difficult to find a lot of studies and we had seven elders at that time.
And then when you hear of congregations here where they have one elder, zero elders and where you can make a greater contribution, wow, this is what we want to do.
The field service in these lands will likely be much more productive than in the more affluent countries they have left behind.
The ministry, before I didn't have any studies, I would never have dreamed of having to study in.
But now I have returned visits, I have studies and it's a lot easier.
Well people answer the doors a lot, they want to study, they progress and people get baptized, maybe even in the same year that they start studying.
Just to give you an example of the blessings that one can have, there was a brother with his wife here for a span of 10 years.
During those 10 years he saw the number of congregations in his city go from two to ten and he helps start five of those congregations.
And during those 10 years he and his wife had on the average two people that they brought to baptism each year.
Families with children see amazing benefits and not just in the ministry.
One reason we did this is to be able to focus on our children, raising them in the truth.
So we felt like we didn't really have much time to waste and so we got busy trying to put ourselves in the situation so that we could focus on our children and help them to grow up and be strong on the truth.
The big thing is that we have time as a family, we spend more time in the ministry, more time just relaxing together.
And so that's really good and we've seen Drew progress significantly since we've arrived.
She had spiritual goals before but now she talks about what she wants to go to Bethel, she wants to be a missionary and she was just baptized a few months ago.
So she's really took a hold of the truth solid.
That's been the biggest thing for us is to see her progress.
Well just experiencing everything here, all the Bible studies and mom and dad have a lot of nice studies and it's really nice.
We're not focused on material pursuits and obviously under God's Kingdom we're not going to be focused on our career.
We're going to be focused on doing just what your hubby tells us to do, we're happy, we're united as a family and we have, we feel like we have a little purpose.
However, there are some challenges.
There's going to be a lot more work because that's why it's called a greater need and there's a lot more work with the congregations, a lot more work with the brothers and a lot more work even in the field service.
And you walk a lot sometimes for miles and we're physically tired but there's just so much more joy because you know you're using your life the way you're supposed to be using it, the way it was meant to be used and it's just a better way of life overall.
It doesn't feel like we left something behind, this is where we want to be.
The wonderful thing about translation work is that it proved Jehovah's love for each individual.
Language divides people and obviously since the time of the Tower of Babel we've seen a lot of divisions, earth wide.
And yet the pure language of Bible truth is something that unites God's people.
Jehovah's Witnesses stand out as absolutely different from any other organization because here we have all these volunteer workers that are translating, putting the message into other languages so that we have the same logic, the same goal and all worship the same God.